We're at this critical inflection point
it seems.
A
dangerous era potentially for
geopolitics, the US, China
racing for AI.
What is your nightmare scenario here?
Yeah. Well, AGI, it's you know, the the
general intelligence so that the model
is able to think on its own. It's maybe
it's going to happen, maybe it isn't
going to happen. Well, if it's going to
happen, I sure want it to happen in the
United States, not in China. I don't
want to wake up one day and find out
they have a they have a general
intelligence robot.
I'm a friend of Sarah Connor. You don't
want
the Terminator but Chinese. Exactly. I'd
rather if there's going to be a
Terminator, let him be American.
I'll be back.
[Music]
Today on Bold Names, Condoleezza Rice,
the former US Secretary of State and
current head of the Hoover Institution
at Stanford University.
A big name in foreign affairs, she's
also has a strategic consulting firm
that she founded with some other big
names in that world. She is helping
companies navigate what is our dangerous
current world. And one of her
big sort of hobby horses now is making
sure that the future is not filled with
Terminators and especially that we don't
end up in a situation where China's
building Terminators and nobody else is.
I don't know about you, Tim. I think
about all of these things a lot. I have
kids. I really do not want one of them
to have to become John Connor and save
us from that future. Yeah, absolutely.
Want to avoid that. Terminator 1,
Terminator 2, definitely not the future
I want. Maybe Terminator 3 I could kind
of live with.
Maybe. In the meantime, let's get to
this interview with Condoleezza Rice.
Welcome. Thanks for making time today.
Thanks. It's a pleasure to be with you.
We want to talk a lot about business in
the international world today, but first
maybe let's set the the scene.
What's going on out there?
It's challenging international
environment. Business leaders for a long
time I think probably took for granted
the idea that it there was going to be
some stability in the global order and
now maybe not so. Makes it challenging
for
making those business investments.
What do you see out there? Is it more
competitive than ever or is it a new era
of competition? Yeah.
Well, certainly I think it is a more
uncertain international environment. The
way that I put it is we've become quite
accustomed
in the business community to thanks to
the kind of integration of the
international economy, you could put
your supply chains where it was most
efficient, you could invest where the
ROI was greatest, you could do your
manufacturing and assembly where the
labor conditions were best and I think
business is painted on a kind of broad
canvas that was almost borderless in the
way that people thought about it. And I
think what's happened is in part because
of the way that China has dealt with its
integration into the international
system, but also the kind of
technological arms race that's come out
of that and then some disappointment in
parts of these countries and not just
the United States, but several
democracies with the effects of
globalization on some elements, some
parts of the voting public. That is
breaking down. We're getting more
nationalistic policies. We're getting a
sense that supply chains that are wholly
dependent on China are not secure. And
so yes, I do think that the system as
we've known it is more uncertain, but
the one thing that I'd be very clear on
is this is not because of a change in
administration. This has been happening
underneath for some time and it's likely
to survive
into the next administration, whoever
that is. And so I think it's important
for businesses to recognize this is a
fairly permanent set of secular changes.
I think what you're trying to say there
diplomatically is this is not a Trump
administration issue. This says those
that those trend lines had been building
for several years now. I think some
people
would like to label it as a new Cold
War.
Right? I think I've heard you talk about
how that's perhaps an imperfect term for
that and I'm curious why you think that.
Whenever you use a term like that is
analogous to some other period in
history, you realize people like
analogies, but is it is it getting in
the way of our understanding of what's
actually going on?
With the Soviet Union, we had a an
adversary that was a military giant, but
it was an economic and technological
At no time was more than 4% of Soviet
GDP determined by international trade.
It wasn't integrated into the
international system. One of the
difficulties in dealing with China is
that after 20 plus years of integration,
you're finding that it's actually pretty
hard to do something about rare earth
minerals because they own the supply
chain and they can withhold very
important magnets. So the Soviet Union
would never have been able to do that.
So I don't like the analogy because I
think we like the analogy because we won
the Cold War. But I don't like it
because I think it it really does
obfuscate this very real difference in
what the the challenge from China looks
like. There is a military element, but
there's a huge economic and
technological element as well.
You've described China as a
technological peer
to the US. I'd love some specifics here.
Obviously AI leaps to mind. What other
areas of technology are you concerned
about where China can match or exceed
the US and then of course use that not
just economically, but militarily?
Well, one advantage that I have is I am
the director of the Hoover Institution,
but I sit at Stanford University and so
I can walk 15 minutes from here and talk
to the best computer scientists and the
best bioengineers and the best
roboticists. And they will tell you that
not just in AI, but in robotics,
particularly usable robots, ask a lot of
scientists where they're buying their
robots and they'll tell you China.
We all know about the battery technology
story for EVs and and synthetic biology,
which is something I don't think people
pay enough attention to.
Which is really
>> biology, if you could briefly define
that.
>> Yes, so you're really talking about
using
engineering the cell as opposed to doing
doing a kind of natural process for it.
And I'll just give you a a very
very vivid view. When Deep Seek came
out, Deep Seek is the Chinese AI model.
Chinese AI
AI model. There was not a single
national security person who wasn't
stunned by that.
There was not a single computer
scientist who didn't see it coming.
And so they what is going on in the
private sector, in the scientific and
technological sector
that is sometimes almost invisible to
people who study national security is
something that we have to watch. Those
worlds need to link up much more
effectively. Okay, so you wear
quite a few hats
in your professional life these days.
And one of the things that you do is
you're the founding partner of a
international strategic consulting firm.
And let me get the name right. Rice,
Hadley, Gates and Manuel. Right. And
you are consulting with businesses out
there who are trying to get their minds
around all of this international
uncertainty. I'm I'm curious, love to
know the names, but more importantly,
what industries are you helping out
there? Yeah, we have industries really
across. We have tech companies, we have
energy companies. We
have companies that are
in the financial sector. So we try to
help companies to understand
what's going on in the kind of ecosystem
in the international system. And it goes
back to the first comment that I made,
you know, kind of accept that the days
when supply chains were just kind of
wherever you thought they were most
efficient, those days are gone. So how
do you begin to adjust without over
adjusting?
One of the hard things about right now
is to tell signal from noise.
There's an awful lot of hopping up and
down out there about what and it's not
going to settle down for a while. So you
don't want to be you know, the
children's soccer game where everybody's
running to the where the ball is. You
want to try to have some sense of
what is enduring in your company, what
is what needs to change, what might be
modified, do you have the right skill
sets? Rather than just every headline
lead you to to think that it's in
crisis. I'd love a concrete example of
where long-term thinking beats reacting
to every headline cuz surely there's
something around tariffs or
tech transfer, I don't know. But I I
just love obviously not talking about
specific companies, but if you could
give us an example of a trend. Going
back for a while
on supply chains for instance, we had
talked to companies about diversifying
supply chains.
Because it was pretty clear that a
combination of Chinese policy which made
some elements difficult and the fact
that you were starting to get backlash
in the United States and we used to
always say when you think about risk,
don't leave it to the risk officer cuz
it's not going to be the risk officer
who's testifying before Congress, it's
going to be your CEO.
So bring this into your boardroom.
Do some simulation with it and think
about a contingency planning at this
point. If this goes this way, what would
we do? We encourage companies to have
what we call indicators. We do this all
the time in the national security world.
What are the five things that they would
begin to happen that you would be
concerned about? One of the really
interesting things that happened when
the Russians invaded Ukraine.
Was that that was a real kind of shock
to the system.
Because it was even though there was
some smoke around what the Russians were
doing that they would do it in a way
that basically took them out of the
international economy was not really on
table. And so we did have to help
companies with really pretty fast
adjustments. In that case for what
happens to your workforce. What do you
do about Russians who are working for
you? So sometimes you do have to do
crisis management. But if you can do it
over if you can have some sense of the
things that might happen. Start to use
simulation actually exercise those then
you will be better prepared.
I just want to make one other point. We
always ask companies to do something
that I did in a political risk book that
I wrote
a while ago with my colleague Amy
Zegart.
There's industry risk. Right? So
industry risk means that if you are
let's say an oil company.
You are driven by geology. You you can't
just go wherever you like to be. So
you're going to have to take some
industry risk. But there's also the
matter of
of enterprise risk. Within the industry
where does your enterprise set? If you
set if you are a wildcatter you'll look
at that world differently than if you
are a supermajor. And so we try to get
companies to analyze the industry risk
and then analyze the
enterprise risk and that begins to
narrow the the questions that you're
asking.
I remember very well when the NBA was
kicked out of China because of something
that the Houston Rockets general manager
said. Now the Rockets general manager
under fire after comments he made about
the ongoing violence in Hong Kong. A
tweet backing pro-democracy
demonstrations right here in Hong Kong.
>> You know the tweet itself you know you
never know the ramifications that can
happen.
And I was talking to NBA folks and I
said look they're not going to kick you
out of out of China because those young
princelings are not going to watch the
Kazakh national team play the Chinese
national team.
That's exciting. Yeah it's not much fun.
They're going to want to see LeBron and
they want to see Steph. So
you have to know where on that
continuum you are but if you're in the
technology space.
Then you are going to decouple from
China. I mean just watching things right
now
to see some of these companies
essentially become I don't know pawns in
the the global negotiations. I mean you
look at Nvidia these days.
Really having a tough time with China
just recently
the government there seemingly
blacklisting. It's newest AI chip
among Chinese tech companies which is a
challenge for them.
And
how if you were advising them right now
how what do you what do you even say to
a company like that? Yeah well I know
I know as you might imagine the Nvidia
pretty well. They're they're going to
work their way through this. But the
first thing is
I'd ask the Chinese what are you doing?
You say you want foreign direct
investment and then you blacklist the
biggest American company on which
everybody knows you've been dependent on
chips. Are you trying to get some kind
of bargain where you get the higher end
chips? What's the purpose here? What in
the world are you doing?
If you want to keep something of an
integrated economy but Nvidia is
such a huge presence and the one thing
that they've really shown that I really
admire is their ability to continually
reinvent themselves.
And I think that's what's going to serve
them best. It's interesting we talked to
a lot of CEOs I talked to a lot of CEOs
and they always.
Seem to think that they are facing
unprecedented challenges and especially
in this kind of global
space.
And I'm curious your perspective on kind
of the long arc of time if you will. It
clearly the situation is different than
this perhaps last generation where free
trade was kind of a given if you will.
Is there another period in history that
you kind of see some similarities to and
and companies need to be thinking about
it that way?
Well I I like to quote my colleague
historian Steve Kotkin who says that
everything's unprecedented if you don't
know history.
And we do jump to the idea of
unprecedented pretty quickly.
I suspect that some of the issues that
what passed for international business
in the 30s
was pretty tough if you were a
financier. How did you think about this
world that was clearly falling apart
militarizing people moving to their
corners?
How did you think about access to
resources at a time when
those issues were starting to fuel the
possibility of war? This isn't the first
time that we've had tariffs in major
ways.
But I do think there are a couple things
that are really very different and one
is that the
the the industrial revolution everybody
says you know well it changed everything
but the technology is moving so fast in
so many different areas and it has. No
it's basically a private sector
business. The US government doesn't own
any of the. Assets really of the
of the innovation
it revolution that we're going through.
The other thing that is very different
as I've said is that.
You know we're trying to de-link
decouple de-risk whatever you want to
call it from a country that is a
dominant force in the international
economy. You mean China? China and it's
suddenly become an adversary. That's
that's pretty different. Is that so
different though? Sorry I have to jump
in because I'm reading a book on the
naval history of World War I right now.
Isn't there This is another crazy Friday
night for Mims. Yeah.
Seriously though.
You're a Russianist so I know you know
this history right? Great Britain and
Germany allies they were doing naval
exercises together they were peer
countries. Germany was a little bit
ahead technologically they were
intertwined economically because that
was the beginning of globalization. And
nobody thought they would ever fight. I
mean at that time they didn't think that
they would fight. Yeah yeah.
>> Franz Ferdinand gets assassinated and
before you know it Churchill is chasing
down German armored cruisers in the
Mediterranean. I mean is there a
parallel here where the world seems
stable but you have these peer economies
that. You know turning on on on
seemingly small events could end up in a
conflict pretty rapidly because they're
set up for it right?
>> Yeah you're you're absolutely right that
it that even though history doesn't
repeat itself what's it said that
sometimes it rhymes and there are little
elements of that in here. But but I I
wouldn't confuse the integration that
was going on in either the end of the
end of the 19th century the kind of
beginning of the 20th century. I mean
people talk about the integrated
currency they were all on the gold
standard. Well yeah of course but I
think you know they were all
intermarrying. Yes.
But I don't think that compares to what
you're seeing now in terms of how far
the integration went of China and it's
largely because this was not basically
the work of governments. This was
basically the work of the private
sector. It's Tencent and Foxconn and
people like that. Everybody everybody
because you know the CEO narrative is
yeah it's we've got some IP problem and
actually you know intellectual property
problems there. Yes there's some
segments that are closed but boy that's
a huge market you got to be there.
And that was the government's view too.
Which then kind of encouraged
the business sector to go do it. I feel
a little bad sometimes for
elements of the business sector when
they're told how how could you be doing
that in China? Well because you kind of
said it was a good thing to do that in
China. At the beginning of the 2000s. So
I think the the depth of integration the
impact of the private sector
is just different than at other times. I
mean so a company can only do so much
right? And really this is.
Nation against nation
and in order for the US to stay on top.
Especially in these fast moving areas of
AI and.
And.
Fusion and robotics and all these
interesting kind of spaces that.
US investors are excited about US
companies are excited about so is China.
What what needs to happen in the US?
What conditions need to be created in
the US to protect the US?
The first thing is run hard and run fast
or I just
try try not to worry too much about
downsides. I know everybody says all
there all these downsides to these
innovations.
Somebody said the other day you know
well there was a downside to fire too as
an innovation. So you know let's let's
not get caught up in the downsides. I
think the
the opportunities way outweigh the
downsides.
The second is keep the
keep it so that you can innovate in a
broad range of places and
and then find room in the US government
particularly the US military for those
small companies to find a place in
procurement. In the Pentagon where it's
still a bit the Death Star where you
know it's a little hard to to approach
if you're a small company. So those are
some of the elements that have made us
strong and I think we should continue to
do. One of the reasons that I emphasize
run hard and run fast is that I trust.
Democratic institutions to make
corrections if something starts to go
really wrong.
If you have a go wrong let's say in AI,
which it will. You're going to have
investigative reporting, probably by
some people you work with. Uh you're
going to have um
the um
the congressional hearings.
Uh this will not happen in China. We saw
the way that they deal with this sort of
thing with COVID. They'll lie about it,
they'll cover it up. And so uh I want
democratic states to stay ahead in uh in
this regard.
The The other point I'd like to see our
allies more in the game in innovation.
Um
the I was just in in London and Berlin.
And uh
you know, the British have a lot going
on in AI, where uh DeepMind was uh was
uh created. Uh but because of their the
limitations of financing for uh
small companies and like and and
venture,
people come to the United States. Uh one
British uh very senior British person,
who's no longer in government, but he
said, "How in the world did we let
DeepMind get sold to an American
company?"
And I do think there's something that's
going on in um in Europe that is
lamentable, which is right now the
United States is the innovation economy
and the uh Europeans are the regulators.
Uh that's bound to bring real tensions
in our relationships. I mean, you're
really getting at these kind of landmark
tech laws that the EU passed a few years
ago and that have just started going
into implementation. And some of these
were really kind of uh targeting
concerns um
about the dangers of social media,
right? Or uh that some of these US
companies had just become too powerful
for digital markets, right? And and they
were concerned about
protecting um
the innovation that could occur, but you
think it sounds like you're saying it's
gone too far. So, the first I fully
understand. Uh we all know the downsides
of social media. And uh
not only is it tough. I teach in a
university and I worry a lot about these
kids uh who've never known anything but.
And it is contributing to our
polarization because social media
encourages you to go to your tribe. And
then you never actually talk to anybody
who thinks differently. So, when you
talk to somebody who thinks differently,
you think they're stupid or venal. And
>> Yeah, and it exposes you to the worst
opinions from the other side rather than
the things you have in common.
Precisely. And you get uh
and to be disagreeable is to get more
clicks, right? And the kind of extreme
extreme of that is you get political
violence. So, um I I'm I worry about
that. The other, I I really think that
the Europeans, if innovation is not
flowing in Europe, it's more not because
US companies are so dominant. They are
dominant, but but that's because you
don't have the uh the uh innovation uh
ecosystem in Europe to support
innovation. There's a very good report
that's come out in Europe. Draghi did
this report about how you can create a
better in innovation infrastructure in
Europe. And that seems to be a better
answer than trying to halt the market um
for the US companies. Mario Draghi, the
former Italian Prime Minister. Yes, and
and wrote a big uh a big uh report on
how Europe could uh innovate.
You're talking about the the pull in
terms of where capital is available for
companies like this. But obviously
there's there's a push, there's a
genesis.
So much of that comes out of uh you
know, universities. We rely on
universities in the US for um pioneering
research, but also for the talent
pipeline. I hear over and over again
when I talk to companies. I mean, that
is of course where their talent comes
from.
How are we going to maintain this
technological lead, which you've
described as being so critical for us to
run fast and run hard, um if university
funding and specifically research
funding is under threat? Look,
universities have a lot to atone for. Um
I would be the first to say that the
behavior after October 7th was
um
irresponsible is a mild way of saying
it. Um
I I had a colleague who asked uh his
students, "From what river to what sea
in the, you know, Palestine will be
free?" And this, of course, in
international relations, and almost none
of them knew.
So, uh we we haven't done a very good
job of education about some of these
issues.
It's also true that we were not places
where uh civil dialogue around
difference was welcome. There was an
orthodoxy. And if you didn't speak to
that orthodoxy, which was pretty
left-wing, then uh you were uh held up
as an example of fill in the blank, you
know, uh
xenophobic or misogynist or whatever.
And so, universities have a lot to atone
for. I think people are starting to get
back to the basics that university
should be neutral and not try to have
political positions as institutions.
But if the cost for trying to rectify
that is that we destroy what basically
has been the infrastructure of
innovation, which is the government
funding universities to do the basic
research, to train the PhDs, to bring
people into the private sector, to be
the basis on which companies are founded
even in the United States, then we've
really uh created a a a great deficit
for the things we need to do. And unless
we we don't have a we don't have a plan
B. The biggest problem is we don't have
a plan B. And while I know that a lot of
you know, I'm if my friends down the
road here in Silicon Valley are
listening, you'll say, "But a lot of
innovation's going on in companies."
That is absolutely true.
And it is also true that on things like
AI, uh universities don't have the
compute power that it takes to do some
of the large language models that my
friends at, you know, Google or Meta or
uh Microsoft are doing.
But I would ask the following question.
Do you really want
all of the innovation to be done in the
private sector? I'm a
a
incredible capitalist. You won't find
anybody who's more believer in the
capitalist system than I am.
But I'd like some of the innovation to
come because what happens in
universities is somebody gets up and
says, "I wonder why that does that?"
And they don't have to worry about how
long it's going to be before
it proves to have commercial value.
They can pursue it for a long period of
time. One of the great examples of this
is that a lot of the neural networks
work work that was done that now
supports AI or is now the reason for AI,
sat on shelves from the '60s
when people began to understand this,
but it was another 50 years before the
compute power to create what we now see
was possible.
Would a company wait 50 years to see
that? So, you want to have
uh a part of the uh innovation uh
in system that is just driven by
curiosity. Yeah, it sounds like you
don't want to throw out the innovation
baby with the ideology bathwater, if I
can murder a metaphor. Exactly. Exactly.
Okay, so we started this conversation
talking about your nightmare scenario in
this global tech race.
Uh let's flip that. What's the best
possible
a scenario here? What's the What's
What's What's out there? What's the
potential that you see? Yeah. Well, in
fact, I spend a lot more time and am a
lot more confident in the positive side
than in the negative side. Um
I I do believe that the potential
for these technologies to change the
face of education, to change the face of
health care, we're all looking for
growth, right? Uh
industrial productivity
uh might give us the growth that we need
to deal with the fact that we don't seem
to be able to deal with fiscal
responsibility any longer in our
governments. And so, uh we've got to
grow and grow and grow. And I don't see
any way to grow without this
technological revolution really having
an impact pretty near term on the way
that companies do their business.
My optimistic case is that we really
mobilize the technology in ways
that uh
gives us the productivity that we need,
that gives our kids a better chance at a
good education, and that begins to solve
some of the worst disease problems that
we have. Uh our aging population
uh really needs breakthroughs in uh some
of the uh long-term um
problems of dementia and and uh the
like. And people who work in those
fields tell me that AI is giving them a
new chance.
So, uh this is a real benefit. And I I
get up every morning, uh come to this
place, and I'm excited that the United
States is at the forefront.
Um I just want us to make sure that we
completely take advantage of this
moment. Well, that's a good spot.
Secretary Rice, thank you so much.
Thank you. It was a pleasure being with
you. We reached out to the Chinese
Embassy in Washington, D.C. A
spokesperson said that China's
cybersecurity regulator summoned
chipmaker Nvidia over alleged security
risks to Chinese users
and said that for all companies, quote,
"The first priority when operating in
China is compliance with Chinese laws
and regulations."
The spokesperson also disagreed with how
Secretary Rice characterized China's
response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
adding that China released information,
quote, "openly and transparently with
the World Health Organization and other
countries, including the United States."
And we also reached out to the UK
Department for Science, Innovation, and
Technology,
which did not respond to our request for
comment.
[Music]